README.md, before:

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/SARS-CoV-2-ORF3d/blob/master/images/cover_image.png?raw=true" title="Overlapping gene products" alt="Overlapping gene products" align="left" size="small">

# Taiwan COVID-19 Analyses (2021)
Data, methods, and results of analyses tracking the May 2021 COVID-19 outbreak in Taiwan.


## <a name="contents"></a>Contents

* [Description](#description)
* [Data Sources](#data-sources)
* [Methods](#methods)
* [Results](#results)
	* [Backlogging](#backlogging)
	* [Time-Lapse of Cases](#time)
	* [Cases By Date Added](#cases)
	* [Seven-Day Average of Total Reported Cases](#seven)
	* [Backlog Time Distribution](#backlog)
	* [Projected Totals After Revision](#projected)
* [Notes and Clarifications](#notes)
* [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)
* [Contact](#contact)


## <a name="description"></a>Description

These charts depict the ongoing case numbers in Taiwan since an outbreak began in early May, with Taipei declaring a Level 3 Alert on May 15. Data are recorded as they are announced by the [Ministry of Health and Welfare](https://www.facebook.com/mohw.gov.tw) (MOHW) each day at 2pm (14:00) Taipei Time. 

This repository collects the data shown each day and the analysis methods used. Specifically:

* The `data` folder contains data displayed on each date
* The `visualizations` folder contains visualizations by date
* The R script `Taiwan_COVID19_data.R` contains the code used to produce numerical results and visualizations

I focus on a few key metrics, and make no attempt to be thorough. For example, I do not currently track deaths. My purpose is not to provide a complete picture, but rather new ways of understanding the case counts as they are revised, and what they might tell us about the trajectory of the outbreak. All opinions are my own.


## <a name="data-sources"></a>Data Sources

Raw data were retrieved from the following sources:

1. Taiwan CDC website: 

`https://data.cdc.gov.tw/dataset/daily-cases-suspected-sars-cov-2-infection_tested`
`https://data.cdc.gov.tw/en/dataset/covid19_tw__stats`
`https://data.gov.tw/dataset/120451`

2. Taiwan Ministry of Health and Welfare (MOHW)

`https://www.facebook.com/mohw.gov.tw`
`https://twitter.com/MOHW_Taiwan`

3. 天下 (Commonwealth)

`https://web.cw.com.tw/covid-live-updates-2021-en/index.html`

4. Open Data Public Collaborations

`https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1qh20J-5rGVIEjLcGKJnfj7huAp-nCxsd-fJdmh3yZKY/htmlview#`
`https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/12tQKCRuaiBZfc9yDd6tmlOdsm62ke_4AcKmNJ6q4gdU/htmlview#`


## <a name="methods"></a>Methods

Data were downloaded or manually recorded from the aforemenetioned sources. All statistical analyses were performed in Microsoft Excel and R version 3.5.2 (2018-12-20) "Eggshell Igloo" (<a target="_blank" href="https://www.R-project.org/">R Development Core Team</a>). Specifically, the R script `Taiwan_COVID19_data.R` was used to analyze data and produce raw visualizations, which were then modified in Microsoft PowerPoint. Note that the R script is meant to be run manually, line-by-line in an interactive program such as RStudio. This forces the user (e.g., me!) to inspect the results as they are analyzed, check for errors, and make any changes necessary due to peculiarities in each day's new results.


## <a name="results"></a>Results

I here provide demonstrations of the results produced for the data of May 31, 2021 (20210531). The charts will not be regularly updated; instead, updates will be regularly posted to <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/chasewnelson">Twitter</a> and <a target="_blank" href="https://www.facebook.com/chasewnelson">Facebook</a>. 

### <a name="backlogging"></a>Backlogging

Because of an initially limited testing capacity, tests have been delayed and results regularly assigned to previous days, a method referred to as 'backlogging'. Backlogging achieves increasingly accurate counts for individual days. However, it also introduces difficulties for comparing *between* different days. Specifically, while results are still unfinished, it can create illusion of a downward trend (drop in case numbers) as an artifact, because recent days will be disproportionately underestimated. This has been brilliantly explained by [Linc_tw](https://twitter.com/Linc_tw/status/1397207338059276297).

The visualizations below attempt to demonstrate the effect backlogging may be having on perceived trends, and to clarify the meaning of the revised data being reported. Finally, we provide a projection of finalized counts accounting for the current backlog and its known time distribution.


### <a name="time"></a>Time-Lapse of Cases

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/time_lapse_20210531.gif?raw=true" title="Time-lapse of Cases" alt="Time-lapse of Cases" align="left" size="small">

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/cases_by_days_late_20210531.png?raw=true" title="Cases by days late" alt="Cases by days late" align="left" size="small">

Here results are depicted by **days late** (shade of red). Late additions to previous days (backlogging) can create the illusion of a downward trend, because recent days will be disproportionately underestimated, having had fewer chances (days) to 'score points' from backlogging. Put another way, many more tests are 1-day-late than 10-days-late. Thus, these lighter bar portions grow larger closer to the present (right) because they are predicted to be less complete: future revisions should change today’s total a lot more than totals from a week ago.


### <a name="cases"></a>Cases by Date Added

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/cases_by_date_added_20210531.png?raw=true" title="Cases by date added" alt="Cases by date added" align="left" size="small">

Here results are instead depicted by **date added** (shade of orange) during backlogging.


### <a name="seven"></a>Seven-Day Average of Total Reported

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/cases_reported_7dayWindow_20210531.png?raw=true" title="Seven-Day Average of Total Reported" alt="Seven-Day Average of Total Reported" align="left" size="small">

Here results are shown as 7-day averages (red line) using non-backlogged totals REPORTED each day (gray bars). Each day is the mean of itself and the previous 6 days. This provides a decent measure of trend when outstanding tests remain unfinished and the extent of possible revisions to previous dates is uncertain.


### <a name="backlog"></a>Backlog Time Distribution

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/backlog_time_distribution_20210531.png?raw=true" title="Backlog Time Distribution" alt="Backlog Time Distribution" align="left" size="small">

On the day shown (May 31, 2021) the backlog was ~30k tests. To that point, 21.5% of tests had been assigned to the previous day; 18.0% to the day before that; and so on. This allows a projection of how the current backlog will be distributed (next section).


### <a name="projected"></a>Projected Totals After Revision

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/projected_total_20210531.png?raw=true" title="Projected Totals After Revision" alt="Projected Totals After Revision" align="left" size="small">

For this date (May 31, 2021), 1.8% of recent targeted tests (likely cases) had been positive. Given this, a simple estimate is that 1.8% of the ~30k backlog will test positive and be distributed to previous dates in the same manner (distribution) observed so far. Based on this reasoning, Albert Lin 林書弘 and I made the projection above.


## <a name="notes"></a>Notes and Clarifications

1. For the date of May 30, 2021 (20210530), the MOHW retracted the backlogged numbers provided at press time. The analyses for that day use their [updated values](https://twitter.com/MOHW_Taiwan/status/1398166785363349505), released later that day shortly before 5pm (17:00) Taipei Time.


## <a name="acknowledgments"></a>Acknowledgments

Mitch (Ming-Hsueh) Lin 林明學 was critical for conceiving visualizations. Albert Lin 林書弘, Mitch (Ming-Hsueh) Lin 林明學, and Alexis (surname unknown) provided critical insights and feedback. The Taiwan CDC and MOHW, as well as the open source data sharing community in Taiwan (including Samuel Liu and g0v) were essential for openly sharing and compiling data. Finally, a big thanks to the government, medical, and science workers who have made Taiwan — still — the Safest Place On Earth. We're lucky to live in this country. It should be <a target="_blank" href="https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-00693-2">part of the World Health Organization (WHO)</a>.


## <a name="contact"></a>Contact and troubleshooting

If you have questions about the scripts or results, please first thoroughly read the documentation and in-line comments relevant to the analysis of interest. If these do not answer your question, please click on the <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/issues">Issues</a> tab at the top of this page and search to see if your question has already been answered; if not, begin a new issue, so that others might benefit from the discussion.

Other queries should be addressed to the author: 

*  Chase W. Nelson, cnelson <**AT**> gate <**DOT**> sinica <**DOT**> edu <**DOT**> tw

Commit message:

Time lapse and second update for May 31, 2021 (20210531)

README.md, after:

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/SARS-CoV-2-ORF3d/blob/master/images/cover_image.png?raw=true" title="Overlapping gene products" alt="Overlapping gene products" align="left" size="small">

# Taiwan COVID-19 Analyses (2021)
Data, methods, and results of analyses tracking the May 2021 COVID-19 outbreak in Taiwan.


## <a name="contents"></a>Contents

* [Description](#description)
* [Data Sources](#data-sources)
* [Methods](#methods)
* [Results](#results)
	* [Backlogging](#backlogging)
	* [Time-Lapse of Cases](#time)
	* [Cases By Date Added](#cases)
	* [Seven-Day Average of Total Reported Cases](#seven)
	* [Backlog Time Distribution](#backlog)
	* [Projected Totals After Revision](#projected)
* [Notes and Clarifications](#notes)
* [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)
* [Contact](#contact)


## <a name="description"></a>Description

These charts depict the ongoing case numbers in Taiwan since an outbreak began in early May, with Taipei declaring a Level 3 Alert on May 15. Data are recorded as they are announced by the [Ministry of Health and Welfare](https://www.facebook.com/mohw.gov.tw) (MOHW) each day at 2pm (14:00) Taipei Time. 

This repository collects the data shown each day and the analysis methods used. Specifically:

* The `data` folder contains data displayed on each date
* The `visualizations` folder contains visualizations by date
* The R script `Taiwan_COVID19_data.R` contains the code used to produce numerical results and visualizations

I focus on a few key metrics, and make no attempt to be thorough. For example, I do not currently track deaths. My purpose is not to provide a complete picture, but rather new ways of understanding the case counts as they are revised, and what they might tell us about the trajectory of the outbreak. All opinions are my own.


## <a name="data-sources"></a>Data Sources

Raw data were retrieved from the following sources:

1. Taiwan CDC website: 

`https://data.cdc.gov.tw/dataset/daily-cases-suspected-sars-cov-2-infection_tested`
`https://data.cdc.gov.tw/en/dataset/covid19_tw__stats`
`https://data.gov.tw/dataset/120451`

2. Taiwan Ministry of Health and Welfare (MOHW)

`https://www.facebook.com/mohw.gov.tw`
`https://twitter.com/MOHW_Taiwan`

3. 天下 (Commonwealth)

`https://web.cw.com.tw/covid-live-updates-2021-en/index.html`

4. Open Data Public Collaborations

`https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1qh20J-5rGVIEjLcGKJnfj7huAp-nCxsd-fJdmh3yZKY/htmlview#`
`https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/12tQKCRuaiBZfc9yDd6tmlOdsm62ke_4AcKmNJ6q4gdU/htmlview#`


## <a name="methods"></a>Methods

Data were downloaded or manually recorded from the aforemenetioned sources. All statistical analyses were performed in Microsoft Excel and R version 3.5.2 (2018-12-20) "Eggshell Igloo" (<a target="_blank" href="https://www.R-project.org/">R Development Core Team</a>). Specifically, the R script `Taiwan_COVID19_data.R` was used to analyze data and produce raw visualizations, which were then modified in Microsoft PowerPoint. Note that the R script is meant to be run manually, line-by-line in an interactive program such as RStudio. This forces the user (e.g., me!) to inspect the results as they are analyzed, check for errors, and make any changes necessary due to peculiarities in each day's new results.


## <a name="results"></a>Results

I here provide demonstrations of the results produced for the data of May 31, 2021 (20210531). The charts will not be regularly updated; instead, updates will be regularly posted to <a target="_blank" href="https://twitter.com/chasewnelson">Twitter</a> and <a target="_blank" href="https://www.facebook.com/chasewnelson">Facebook</a>. 

### <a name="backlogging"></a>Backlogging

Because of an initially limited testing capacity, tests have been delayed and results regularly assigned to previous days, a method referred to as 'backlogging'. Backlogging achieves increasingly accurate counts for individual days. However, it also introduces difficulties for comparing *between* different days. Specifically, while results are still unfinished, it can create illusion of a downward trend (drop in case numbers) as an artifact, because recent days will be disproportionately underestimated. This has been brilliantly explained by [Linc_tw](https://twitter.com/Linc_tw/status/1397207338059276297).

The visualizations below attempt to demonstrate the effect backlogging may be having on perceived trends, and to clarify the meaning of the revised data being reported. Finally, we provide a projection of finalized counts accounting for the current backlog and its known time distribution.


### <a name="time"></a>Time-Lapse of Cases

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/time_lapse_20210531.gif?raw=true" title="Time-lapse of Cases" alt="Time-lapse of Cases" align="left" size="small">

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/cases_by_days_late_20210531.png?raw=true" title="Cases by days late" alt="Cases by days late" align="left" size="small">

Here results are depicted by **days late** (shade of red). Late additions to previous days (backlogging) can create the illusion of a downward trend, because recent days will be disproportionately underestimated, having had fewer chances (days) to 'score points' from backlogging. Put another way, many more tests are 1-day-late than 10-days-late. Thus, these lighter bar portions grow larger closer to the present (right) because they are predicted to be less complete: future revisions should change today’s total a lot more than totals from a week ago. Based on the backlogging pattern observed thus far, we considered dates >9 days in the past relatively ‘locked in’ (unlikely to change substantially).


### <a name="cases"></a>Cases by Date Added

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/cases_by_date_added_20210531.png?raw=true" title="Cases by date added" alt="Cases by date added" align="left" size="small">

Here results are instead depicted by **date added** (shade of orange) during backlogging.


### <a name="seven"></a>Seven-Day Average of Total Reported

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/cases_reported_7dayWindow_20210531.png?raw=true" title="Seven-Day Average of Total Reported" alt="Seven-Day Average of Total Reported" align="left" size="small">

Here results are shown as 7-day averages (red line) using non-backlogged totals REPORTED each day (gray bars). Each day is the mean of itself and the previous 6 days. This provides a decent measure of trend when outstanding tests remain unfinished and the extent of possible revisions to previous dates is uncertain.


### <a name="backlog"></a>Backlog Time Distribution

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/backlog_time_distribution_20210531.png?raw=true" title="Backlog Time Distribution" alt="Backlog Time Distribution" align="left" size="small">

On the day shown (May 31, 2021) the backlog was ~28k tests. To that point, 23.1% of tests had been assigned to the previous day; 17.7% to the day before that; and so on. This allowed a projection of how the current backlog would be distributed (next section).


### <a name="projected"></a>Projected Totals After Revision

<img src="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/blob/main/visualizations/projected_total_20210531.png?raw=true" title="Projected Totals After Revision" alt="Projected Totals After Revision" align="left" size="small">

For this date (May 31, 2021), 1.8% of recent targeted tests (likely cases) had been positive. Given this, a simple estimate was that 1.8% of the ~28k backlog would test positive and be distributed to previous dates in the same manner (distribution) observed to that point in time. Based on this reasoning, Albert Lin 林書弘 and I made the projection above.


## <a name="notes"></a>Notes and Clarifications

1. For the date of May 30, 2021 (20210530), the MOHW retracted the backlogged numbers provided at press time. The analyses for that day use their [updated values](https://twitter.com/MOHW_Taiwan/status/1398166785363349505), released later that day shortly before 5pm (17:00) Taipei Time.


## <a name="acknowledgments"></a>Acknowledgments

Mitch (Ming-Hsueh) Lin 林明學 was critical for conceiving visualizations. Albert Lin 林書弘, Mitch (Ming-Hsueh) Lin 林明學, and Alexis (surname unknown) provided critical insights and feedback. The Taiwan CDC and MOHW, as well as the open source data sharing community in Taiwan (including Samuel Liu and g0v) were essential for openly sharing and compiling data. Finally, a big thanks to the government, medical, and science workers who have made Taiwan — still — the Safest Place On Earth. We're lucky to live in this country. It should be <a target="_blank" href="https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-00693-2">part of the World Health Organization (WHO)</a>.


## <a name="contact"></a>Contact and troubleshooting

If you have questions about the scripts or results, please first thoroughly read the documentation and in-line comments relevant to the analysis of interest. If these do not answer your question, please click on the <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/chasewnelson/Taiwan-COVID-19-2021/issues">Issues</a> tab at the top of this page and search to see if your question has already been answered; if not, begin a new issue, so that others might benefit from the discussion.

Other queries should be addressed to the author: 

*  Chase W. Nelson, cnelson <**AT**> gate <**DOT**> sinica <**DOT**> edu <**DOT**> tw
